+++
title = 'Trading'
date = 2025-05-10T14:38:58-04:00
draft = false
+++

Quick(ish), speculative ownership. I spent about 3.5 years in love with this seemingly simple concept, hungry to master it and use it as a lever to control my life. I adored it, then felt disillusioned by it, and ultimately developed a complex opinion, both strongly positive and negative, which I describe here.

Trading is a psychological war zone, swarming with traps to provoke harmful emotions, like fear or greed or anger, that elicit irrational, fatal decisions. Meanwhile, it promises to grant life-changing freedom to those who are impartial, analytical, and disciplined.

An extreme, even beautiful, game which seems almost to teach rationality.

The best parts, in my opinion:

-   **Fairness**. Yes, there's rampant manipulation and insider trading, but surprisingly those don't diminish the positives much for honest players. Consider the issue of personal discrimination: if you don't go to work one day, or you're a convicted felon, or even if you're a woman, a person may certainly act differently knowing that about you. Not your online broker. They're incentivized to serve everyone and will generally do that. You, as a result of trading's objective governance, always have the freedom to work and further yourself if you have capital. So making good decisions today is all that matters, not past decisions or things outside of your control, like age, skin color, etc.

-   **Accommodates productivity/strategy preferences**. There's enough opportunity in the market that wild success can be built from a broad spectrum of tactics. Some strategies definitely suck, but there are plenty that don't. You can adjust trade durations, risk, niche, relevant data, dress code, etc. of the practice as needed or desired. (Unless trading for a job or other external organization that imposes its own rules, of course. All benefits are most applicable when trading independently.)

-   **Economically efficient**. (Not markets themselves as in [EMH](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Efficient-market_hypothesis), but the practice of trading in them.) Trading gives decisive, motivating results. You either _really_ fail and are forced to adapt or quit by the pain of idly hemorrhaging money, or you _really_ succeed and are rewarded a ton for doing something well. Everyone is strongly incentivized to work on what they're good at, or get better fast if they've found it but are still struggling. All (competitive) jobs should be that way, but most currently can't because they exist under bureaucracies that safeguard certain people from failure, e.g., incompetent CEOs won't get fired. Even billionaire traders [flunk out](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reminiscences_of_a_Stock_Operator) if they screw up.

These are all basically about **meritocracy and rationality**, things any serious person should want. Well-invested effort is the only consistent source of reward. That rule doesn't change no matter who your parents are, what they did or didn't do for you, or other factors you weren't responsible for. People are taught that everyone deserves to put in effort and if they do then great things will happen&mdash;exactly as it should be.

Shortly before quitting full-time stock trading in late 2021, it occurred to me that these benefits are due to technology, not finance. I had thought of programmed systems as soulless tools for combating drudgery, but there are philosophical benefits to integrating with tech. It helps us overcome the pitfalls of human bias, for one thing, and can perhaps even train us to become less biased.

Trading is crazy, unpredictable, and exhilarating. Through all the headache-inducing blinking lights, screenshotting charts, tediously scoring the sensibility of all my transactions from 1-to-10, spreadsheets, etc., I was rarely bored. I think it came more naturally to me than most things, which added to the fun and eventual stew of mixed feelings.

**OK, now the negatives**.

It's isolating and depressing, especially if you **1)** trade independently and/or **2)** are not good at meeting people through non-work channels. Your computer monitor isn't a very good conversationalist (not mine, at least). How much is there really to discuss about the work anyway? "Number went up today! Down yesterday..." The only people who will ever understand or care about what you do are other traders, and they probably won't care either unless they think there is something to learn from you. If you decide to play, better play to win!

Finance also has to be the biggest brain- and motivation-drain ever. If you consider that it's only purpose 99%+ of the time is to (selectively) enrich, which can also be done in exchange for intrinsically valuable work like flying planes or making food, it seems obvious that those things are better uses of time than just making money to make money. Arguably, for that reason, it's pointless. The only unique benefit of finance is that it's not creative, you just rinse-and-repeat the same plan every day and seldom need to imagine anything original. It's very easy that way. Do you want the defining quality of your work to be easiness? Even if yes, there are other, more useful non-creative practices: tech support, consulting, medicine, etc.

Some will contend that you should first make money however necessary and then retire to do all the things you love or be altruistic. Or that trading and financial services should exist as fallback options for when you can't find other work. Or that it just isn't anyone's business to pass judgment about how other people manage their lives and resources... These are excuses to be lazy and let culture rot. There are way too many creative, useful, _and_ fun, _and_ lucrative opportunities for it to be worth living trapped in pointless minutiae at a heavy [opportunity cost](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opportunity_cost).

So while I admit that trading can be great, I discourage it.

Make no mistake: investing&mdash;related but different topic&mdash;is very legitimate and worthwhile, mainly since it doesn't (or shouldn't) take up all of your time so there is not such an opportunity cost. In fact, it's the opposite: it makes your time worth more.

**&mdash;Anyhow&mdash;**

Here are some things I learned from trading, which I think are broadly applicable. You'll notice a theme.

1. Since everyone is wrong at least sometimes, you should prepare to be wrong about anything, even deeply held convictions. A probabilistic mindset is the best framework for posturing yourself to handle constant uncertainty, rather than complete faith in your best guess. You'll never lose everything, literally or figuratively, by turning out to be wrong. Some people hate to acknowledge their own wrongness but that's a silly habit that should be unlearned. It's fine to be wrong, just not to stay wrong. Nobody gets everything right, nor can they predict what they'll be wrong about, so therefore you should never act under faith that you must be right about something. Paradoxically, those who admit and even embrace wrongness become most consistently correct. Open-mindedness admits new, relevant facts that can adapt misconceptions. Open-minded people are also more fun, frankly. Having no humility to admit fault or compromise is insufferable. In trading and elsewhere, accepting possible wrongness and moving on gracefully is a superpower.

2. Assuming you want long-term success (hopefully so), it's more important to think about adhering to an informed game plan for the long term than the apparent outcomes in the short term. It's possible to be rewarded for bad choices and punished for good choices, but not for long. Long-term results conform to probabilities. How do you figure out the probabilities, and thus the good choices? Research key metrics, a lot. In trading, the big question is, "what are the most consistent leading indicators of good potential trades?" Which variables correspond most to unusually favorable price fluctuations in the near future? Once that is answered, you can form a plan for identifying strong potential trades. Focusing on "process over profits" (oft-repeated saying about this) was critical for me in making lasting progress at trading after several years of losing or experiencing only temporary success. I reviewed hundreds of stock charts that retrospectively produced trade-worthy conditions (volatility + liquidity, in short), scrutinized them on various timeframes for the most common behaviors, aligned my strategies with those behaviors, and henceforth evaluated myself only on adherence to my strategies while ignoring short-term results. Focus on process, and "profits" will figure themselves out.

3. "Experts" are wrong all the time! Pay attention (i.e., study data you personally collected or received from a reputable source), and you'll notice all kinds of patterns that disprove financial and other "common knowledge." Trend reversals always occur as public sentiment is strongest in the opposing direction. The market is clearly not efficient and immune to being predicted. (How do you explain that some outperform the market average after thousands of rolls of the dice, year after year? I will never understand how EMH advocates manage to ignore this glaring contradiction.) Value investing a la Buffett may have been a dominant strategy 50 years ago, but an [in-depth presentation from a pro trader](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xx8GvtAxilk) or growth investor quickly illuminates how vastly inferior it is to momentum-based strategies in today's volatile market. And usually, despite precipitous ascents amidst fearful chatter, the market chugs on. For an embarrasingly long time, like my mom's clown of a financial advisor who has strong-armed her into opting out of years of stock market gains, I was a frustrated perma-bear convinced that everything was due to crash any second. To finally overcome this, I focused exclusively on my own organic data and shut my ears to other opinions. Turns out it often looks like the verge of disaster, throughout history... To be fair, experts are partly wrong so much in finance because they're incentivized to trick other participants into being wrong. Those traders pay them their paycheck. But even outside finance's unique zero-sum incentives, misinformation is widespread (increasingly, sadly). Don't _believe_ something just because so-and-so said it, research it genuinely and you will _know_ the answer.

4. A simple, surprisingly effective heuristic: if unsure, just do half. You may keep it super simple and do exactly half every time there's too much doubt, or make arbitrarily sized partial bets in tune with your shifting audacity. I'll say it again: constant uncertainty. You must accept that any perception and any plan is fallible. You are always making bets in a sense, and they need not (and should not) often be all-or-nothing. Frequently adjusting commitment to various plans, based on rolling efficacy metrics and even gut feelings, works well to provide exposure to the benefits of risk and diversity while keeping disasters to a minimum.

5. The function for growth is exponential (assuming past growth aids future growth, which should always be true unless a game is truly random or you progress inefficiently). Because of that, and the math of compounding, having many iterations is much more important than optimizing each iteration, and it's therefore better to try to not "lose everything at once" (cease to iterate; disqualify yourself) than to try to "gain everything at once" (iterate perfectly; execute at your theoretical limit). Over time, large exponents are worth more than large coefficients. Significant setbacks that prevent participation, removing the exponent term altogether, obstruct growth much more than failing to capture all daily value, or decreasing the term coefficient. This exposes a fundamental asymmetry between success and failure: noteworthy success usually won't come from one trade or all-night binge. More likely it will be marginal gains compounding. Usually the exponent starts low; you can only grow so fast even if you work tirelessly and make perfect decisions. You still need to build up enough capital to trade freely, or form the right neural pathways to learn how to engage something effectively, etc. Even if you are proficient, motivated, and otherwise capable, binge-practicing (or -studying, -building, -playing, etc.) can still cause resentment and the desire to detach, which is no fun and obviously sucks for growth. But, you can lose everything (or more! if [shorting](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Short_(finance)>)) in one trading day, and it's sadly not even that uncommon, so the threat of failure requires attention more than prospects for success do. Prioritize avoiding total destruction, optimize only with leftover bandwidth. There are a lot of opportunities... way more than enough to get what you want. No need to doom yourself by getting overly attached to any of them.

6. There are natural ups and downs, react accordingly. (This may be more or less relevant to you personally, but overall is an inevitable fact.) Good days and bad days. Typically they cluster together, so when a couple bad days happen at once, expect more. What that means in finance is, "when you start losing more, place smaller bets." The opposite also holds: on a hot streak, it's rational to size-up bets because skill and resulting performance truly do increase along with confidence. It's the same in other matters if you [consider decisions with non-monetary outcomes to also be bets](../quotes#:~:text="Everyone,Thinking), which they absolutely are. Do less of what doesn't work and more of what does. On paper, this advice seems too reactionary and not predictive enough to forecast optimal posturing in the present. But it works pretty well... this touches on another important lesson: simple is best.
